.. index:: replacing vmgroups, secondary connections - vmgroups

.. _replacing_vmgroups:

Replacing VMGroups using Secondary Connections
##############################################

One of the primary use cases for secondary connections is the ability to *watch*
a job from multiple perspectives. This includes being able to start a task in
one job and interact with that task from another job. For example, if one job
runs QEMU to start a VM on the host machine, another connection can test that
the VM responds on the relevant ports, depending on what is installed inside
the image downloaded onto the host machine. More complex jobs could start a
daemon in a debugger and connect to the output of the daemon itself in one job
and to the output of the debugger in another job. This does not necessarily
require the watching job to do anything, the job could just record the output.

The role of a Virtual Machine Group is to arrange a test job such that a host
device, which **must** have virtualization support, boots into a base image and
installs a daemon to allow other test jobs to connect - typically this will be
:ref:`secure_secondary_shells`.

.. seealso:: :ref:`host_role`

Once the secondary connections are logged in, any program accessible in the
base image can be used by the secondary connection. :ref:`As highlighted
<host_role>` in the link above, tasks involving package installation or other
system-wide operations are best done in the test job managing the host device
and preferably **before** the secondary connection jobs start. So the
``install: deps:`` of all jobs in the group should all be collated into the
test definition(s) of the host role.

The secondary connection support performs all the synchronization steps that
are required prior to the test shell starting in each of the secondary test
jobs. The :ref:`multinode_api` remains available for any synchronization
requirements during the test shell operation. **Importantly** the test shell
running on the host device should wait for a :ref:`lava_sync` before completing
the test shell definition. Otherwise the secondary connection jobs may find
that the underlying system suddenly goes away unexpectedly.

With all of that in place, the actual operation of a test involving multiple
virtual machines is little different to a test involving a daemon or long
running task. Something in the secondary job test shell needs to start the
process and something needs to end the process so that the final ``sync`` can
occur. If the task is not capable of terminating itself, it will be necessary
for one test shell (often the host role on the host device) to be able to
terminate it or the test shell will not complete. The choice of how to do this
is left to the test writer.

The command line to use to start the VM(s) on the host device is controlled
entirely by the test specification. This is different to the old deprecated
`vmgroups` support. Image files and other components can be present in the
image deployed to the host device or downloaded by the host device or after the
secondary connection is logged in. The delayed start requirements are already
covered by the secondary connections, so the test shell can start the VM
immediately, if desired, or do any preliminary tests first.

Structure of an example job for a mustang
=========================================

This job uses an nfsrootfs for the host device on a mustang (using the U-Boot
pipeline support for the mustang) as the host role. The NFS is a base Debian
Jessie arm64, so the initial lava test shell operation on the host is to
install ``openssh-server`` and then use the ``lava-echo-ipv4`` helper to
declare the IPv4 address of the host machine.

The secondary connection support picks up the IP address in the pipeline
actions, so the id of the message needs to be declared to the relevant action.
The test shell sends:

.. literalinclude:: examples/test-jobs/mustang-ssh-guest.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :lines: 132

Then it tells the secondary connections to start:

.. literalinclude:: examples/test-jobs/mustang-ssh-guest.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :lines: 133

This tells the dispatcher for the ``guest`` role to start the deployment. The
test definition files for secondary connection jobs are copied onto the host
device immediately before the connection is made, then the contents are
unpacked to be able to run the test shell. The tarball will exist on the host
device as ``/<job_id>-overlay-<level>.tar.gz``. For job ID ``74585`` and level
``1.1.5``, this would result in ``/74585-overlay-1.1.5.tar.gz``.

In this example job, the host test shell does nothing except wait for the clients to complete
their own tests before proceeding to run a final test shell of smoke tests.

The receiving action is declared as:

.. literalinclude:: examples/test-jobs/mustang-ssh-guest.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :lines: 65-74

.. note:: the messageID specified to ``lava-send`` (*ipv4*), is also the
   messageID specified to the ``prepare-scp-overlay`` action within the
   pipeline. In addition, the content of the sent message is declared.
   ``lava-send`` uses the syntax ``key=value``, the YAML uses the equivalent
   syntax of ``key: value``. As the value will be substituted with the real IP
   address, the value in the YAML is marked as replaceable using the ``$``
   prefix.

The message parameters are passed to the ``boot`` action of the ``guest`` role
so that the details can be retrieved:

Finally, the jobs with the ``guest`` role are *booted* - this establishes the
connection between the dispatcher and the host device using ssh. Once logged
in, each job completes the boot stage and starts the test shell for that job.

.. literalinclude:: examples/test-jobs/mustang-ssh-guest.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :lines: 95-103

Notes
-----

* **Starting the VM(s)** is for the test writer to implement, depending on the
  support required and the objectives of the test. In the example below, the
  host device simply runs the smoke tests definition in the position where
  images could be downloaded and QEMU started.

* **Use inlines** - this example keeps all of the :ref:`multinode_api` calls to
  the inline definitions. This is a recommended practice and future
  developments will make it easier to match up the synchronization calls from
  inline definitions. So, to adapt this job to do other tasks while the
  secondary connections jobs are running those test shells, move the final
  ``lava-sync clients`` to another inline definition and do the other calls in
  between.

  .. seealso:: :ref:`running_inside_vm`

* **Completion** - It is useful for the host device test shell to do
  **something** after completing the final ``lava-sync`` or the host device may
  complete the test shell before the secondary connections can logout
  correctly, resulting in the secondary connection jobs being incomplete. A
  final test definition of smoke tests or other quick checks could be useful.

`View or Download mustang-ssh-guest.yaml <examples/test-jobs/mustang-ssh-guest.yaml>`_

.. literalinclude:: examples/test-jobs/mustang-ssh-guest.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :linenos:
    :emphasize-lines: 22-24, 67-74, 101-103, 134, 168

.. _running_inside_vm:

Running operations inside the guest VM
======================================

A guest VM started by running QEMU on the command line is not a LAVA
environment (unless the test writer deliberately copies files into it from
another job), so it will not run a lava test shell by default. Tasks can be
executed within the VM from any of the other jobs running on the host device,
dependent on support provided by the test writer.

Remember, although LAVA tries to stay out of the way of how the test runs once
the secondary connection has logged in, there are some things test writers need
to consider to be able to automate tests like these.

#. If you start QEMU with the ``-nographics`` option rather than as a daemon,
   the secondary connection gets connected to the console of that VM at the
   point within the test shell where the call to QEMU is made.

#. Make sure you know if the image being used has a serial console configured.

#. If the image being launched stops at a ``login:`` prompt, the test
   definition will need to handle that prompt or log in to the VM in some other
   way. e.g. by having one of the other secondary connections set up a
   configuration to use ``ssh`` to log in to the VM - the keys needed for this
   login will need to be handled by the test writer.

#. The test shell will **pause**, waiting for QEMU to return, unless QEMU is
   configured to do otherwise or a wrapper like ``pexpect`` is used. (The LAVA
   QEMU devices run a QEMU command using ``pexpect.spawn`` but this is not
   necessarily suitable for test jobs.)

#. If the VM is started as a daemon, then the test shell will need to have a
   way of monitoring when the VM is ready and then connect to the VM, as
   appropriate.

.. note:: The :ref:`lava_start` **only acts once** - i.e. the host role starts,
   then the other jobs wait until ``lava-start`` is sent - at which point these
   jobs will download any test shell definitions and try to connect to the IP
   address declared. It is better to have a synchronization which the test
   writer controls, after all the jobs have connected to the host device.
